2. ADAMS: Property Rights
,change and hence recognizes that no society can remain a smoothly function-
ing, timeless equilibrium.
To make ancient principles of property most salient in the study of class 
stratification is, I suggest, to risk losing sight of the changing complexit-
ies of historical reality by following normative definitions that may have a
trajectory of their own. Diakonoff's upper stratum (and the stale institut-
ions with which it must have come into being in an interactive process) in-
deed found it expedient to codify and cite prescriptive principles. Much 
less clear, however, is how widely and uniformly such principlen ever pre-
vailed. Taken for granted in both private and official transactions was a
wider context of social relationships that surely alwys exercised an impor-
tant, often decisive influence on their outcome. Recorded rights and obli-
gations were only parts of a much larger spectrum of relationships that was 
mostly not recorded, selected according to criteria that were never made ex-
plicit. As Miguel Civil has recently put it,
...il y a des renseignements, souvent essentiels pour la solution de 
nos problèmes, qui ne figurent pas dans les textes non parce qu'ils 
n'étaient point perçus par les scribes mais tout au contraire parce 
qu'ils étaient trop connus des scribes.... Une conclusion assez 
pessimiste s'impose: plus un fait culturel se situr près du noyau
central d'activités humaines, moins il y à de chances qu'il apparaisse 
dans les textes. 2
What is perhaps most importantly and pervasively missing is an acknowledge-
ment of the relative power, extending far beyond any specific relationship 
or transaction, of members of social elites to impose treir will on infer-
ior social segments or even on one another. Lacking this, all too often
discouragingly little can be said in other than stereotypical terms about 
the attribution of motives to actions, and hence about the interplay and 
selection between alternatives. And without this, little real social depth
can be detected, leaving us with testimony more pertinent to the elaboration 
of a series of stylized chronicles than to history as an interpretive and 
explanatory undertaking.
One approach to overcoming these difficulties proceeds primarily from the 
analysis of variant practices and terminology directly attented to within 
the textual corpus. Ultimately Assyriologists will no doubt overcome many
present ambiguities in this fashion, of course to some extent depending on 
the recovery of more and more broadly representative bodies of documentary 
evidence. But much more problematical is a determination of the role of
the largely silent mass of Diakonoff's lower social strata from purely docu-
mentary sources. Archaeological data is potentially more helpful in this 
respect, although the potential will not be realized until this is more wide-
ly acknowledged among my archaeological colleagues as a central responsibil-
ity. But also of some slight help can be a consideration of the conditions
of life and forms of association of the working agricultural population of 
other places as well as periods, in order to take advantage of types of docu-
mentation for which there is as yet no cuneiform parallel.
Let us first briefly consider the frequently associative character of 
peasant village agricultural holdings, which are not neccesarily to be iden-
tified with the more formal, state-recognized features of land tenure sys-
tems. The classic form of communal systems of this type, at least in terms
of its recognition and intensive study by historians, is the "open field" 
village agriculture that, together with the manorial domains exercising con-